Overhaul Linear Algebra documentation (#2448)
Nemocas/AbstractAlgebra.jl: docs/src/matrix_construction.md

```@meta
CurrentModule = AbstractAlgebra
CollapsedDocStrings = true
DocTestSetup = AbstractAlgebra.doctestsetup()
```

# [Constructing Algebraic Matrices](@id matrix_construction)

There are several functions for creating algebraic matrices -- in each case you need to indicate the
ring to which the matrix elements belong, unless this is already unambiguously indicated
by the ring to which the arguments belong. Here we present several of the basic functions for
constructing matrices.

## Why Julia matrices are not sufficient

Unfortunately, Julia's matrices cannot be used in our context due to two independent problems:

- In empty matrices (0 rows or columns) all that is known about a Julia matrix is the type of its entries,

> however for the complex algebraic types, this information is not sufficient to create elements,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
however for advanced algebraic types, this information is insufficient to create elements,
```
Reworded to avoid any possibly ambiguity relating to "complex numbers"

hence `zero(T)` or friends cannot work.
- Many Julia functions (e.g. `det`) assume that all types used embed into the real or complex numbers. For
instance, in Julia `det(ones(Int, (1,1))) == 1.0`, so the fact that the determinant is exactly the integer `1`
is lost. Furthermore, more general rings cannot be embedded into the reals at all.

For this reason, the matrix constructors below must accept (or infer) the ring in which all entries of the
matrix reside.

## Generic constructors

```@docs
matrix(R::NCRing, arr::AbstractMatrix{T}) where {T}
matrix(R::NCRing, r::Int, c::Int, arr::AbstractVecOrMat{T}) where {T}
```

Several other signatures are supported. Existing matrices can be converted
to a different base ring:

```julia
matrix(R::NCRing, arr::MatElem)
matrix(R::NCRing, arr::MatRingElem)
```

We can also create a deep copy of an existing algebraic matrix:

```julia
matrix(mat::MatElem{T}) where {T<:NCRingElement}
```

The base ring can also be inferred from the entries:

```julia
matrix(arr::AbstractMatrix{T}) where {T<:NCRingElement}
matrix(arr::AbstractVector{T}) where {T<:NCRingElement}

> matrix(arr::AbstractVector{<:AbstractVector{T}}) where {T<:NCRingElement}

Reviewer: Should this be about 7 lines later?

Author: My proposed split is:
1. Sometimes you need not specify the ring; it will be inferred.
2. You can however also specify a ring together with a nested vector, in which case the entries will be promoted to the specified ring (if possible).

If I understand you correctly, @JohnAAbbott , you suggest to group the methods differently. 

Option 1:

```julia
matrix(arr::AbstractMatrix{T}) where {T<:NCRingElement}
matrix(arr::AbstractVector{T}) where {T<:NCRingElement}
matrix(arr::AbstractVector{<:AbstractVector{T}}) where {T<:NCRingElement}
matrix(R::NCRing, arr::AbstractVector{<:AbstractVector})
```

Option 2:

```julia
matrix(arr::AbstractMatrix{T}) where {T<:NCRingElement}
matrix(arr::AbstractVector{T}) where {T<:NCRingElement}
```

```julia
matrix(arr::AbstractVector{<:AbstractVector{T}}) where {T<:NCRingElement}
matrix(R::NCRing, arr::AbstractVector{<:AbstractVector})
```

Is this what you had in mind? If so, why would this seem better to you than the current proposal?

```

Finally, nested vectors can be used to construct matrices over a specified
base ring:

```julia
matrix(R::NCRing, arr::AbstractVector{<:AbstractVector})
```

## Special constructors

### The zero matrix

```@docs
zero_matrix(R::NCRing, r::Int, c::Int)
```

The following convenience method is also supported:

```julia
zero_matrix(::Type{MatElem}, R::Ring, n::Int, m::Int)
```

### The ones matrix

```@docs
ones_matrix(R::NCRing, r::Int, c::Int)
```

### The identity matrix

```@docs
identity_matrix(R::NCRing, n::Int)
identity_matrix(M::MatElem{T}) where T <: NCRingElement
```

The following additional signatures are also supported:

```julia
identity_matrix(M::MatElem{T}, n::Int) where T <: NCRingElement
identity_matrix(::Type{MatElem}, R::Ring, n::Int)
```

### Scalar matrices

```@docs

> scalar_matrix(R::Ring, n::Int, a::RingElement)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
scalar_matrix(R::NCRing, n::Int, a::NCRingElement)
```

```@meta
CurrentModule = AbstractAlgebra
CollapsedDocStrings = true
DocTestSetup = AbstractAlgebra.doctestsetup()
```

> # [Constructing Matrices](@id matrix_construction)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# [Constructing Algebraic Matrices](@id matrix_construction)
```

Author: This page would appear both in the AA and the OSCAR documentation. I don't think AA wants to talk about Oscar.

Reviewer: I have just modified the proposed title change.  I think it may be reasonable to refer to Oscar/AA matrices as _algebraic matrices_ to distinguish them from (plain, vanilla, Julia) matrices.  What do you think?
Of course, one could argue that it is strange to refer to a `ZZMatrix` as an "algebraic" matrix.

> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

There are several functions for creating algebraic matrices -- in each case you need to indicate the
ring to which the matrix elements belong, unless this is already unambiguously indicated
by the ring to which the arguments belong.  Here we present several of the basic functions for
constructing matrices.
```

Author: As above, I suggest to avoid saying `Oscar` in the AA documentation.

However, we also want to bare in mind that we will eventually wish to include this page in the OSCAR (linear algebra) documentation. So must chose words that fit both the OSCAR and the AA documentation.

Reviewer: I have employed _algebraic matrix_ here too - to avoid the problem of naming Oscar/AA

## Why Julia matrices are not sufficient

Unfortunately, Julia's matrices cannot be used in our context due to two independent problems:

- In empty matrices (0 rows or columns) all that is known about a Julia matrix is the type of its entries,
however for the complex algebraic types, this information is not sufficient to create elements,
hence `zero(T)` or friends cannot work.
- Many Julia functions (e.g. `det`) assume that all types used embed into the real or complex numbers. For
instance, in Julia `det(ones(Int, (1,1))) == 1.0`, so the fact that the determinant is exactly the integer `1`
is lost. Furthermore, more general rings cannot be embedded into the reals at all.

For this reason, the matrix constructors below must accept (or infer) the ring in which all entries of the
matrix reside.

## Generic constructors

Given an $r \times c$ Julia matrix, the following command constructs the corresponding

> matrix over the given ring `R`, assuming all the entries can be coerced into `R`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
matrix over the given ring `R`, provided that all the entries can be coerced into `R`.
```

```julia
matrix(R::Ring, arr::Matrix{T}) where T <: RingElement
```

> Likewise, we construct the $r \times c$ matrix over the ring `R` whose $(i, j)$ entry is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can construct row-wise the $r \times c$ matrix over the ring `R` whose $(i, j)$ entry is
```

Author: Why `row-wise` @JohnAAbbott ?

Reviewer: Because the elements in the vector are interpreted as appearing in the order `[row-1-entries, row-2-entries,...]`.
Would you prefer `row-by-row` instead of `row-wise`?

Author: On second thought - this is clear I think/hope. Thank you!

> given by `A[c*(i - 1) + j]`, assuming that all the entries can be coerced into `R`, as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
given by `A[c*(i - 1) + j]`, provided that all the entries can be coerced into `R`, as
```

follows:

```julia
matrix(R::Ring, r::Int, c::Int, A::Vector{T}) where T <: RingElement
```

**Examples**

```jldoctest
julia> M = matrix(ZZ, BigInt[3 1 2; 2 0 1])
[3   1   2]
[2   0   1]

julia> N = matrix(ZZ, 3, 2, BigInt[3, 1, 2, 2, 0, 1])
[3   1]
[2   2]
[0   1]
```

## Special constructors

### The zero matrix

> Construct the $r \times c$ matrix over the ring `R` whose entries are all zero in `R`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Construct the $r \times c$ matrix over the ring `R` whose entries are all zero.
```

```julia
zero_matrix(R::Ring, r::Int, c::Int)
```

**Examples**

```jldoctest
julia> P = zero_matrix(ZZ, 3, 2)
[0   0]
[0   0]
[0   0]
```

### The identity matrix

Create the $n \times n$ identity matrix over the ring `R`.

```@docs
identity_matrix(::Ring, ::Int)
```

**Examples**

```jldoctest
julia> identity_matrix(ZZ, 2)
[1   0]
[0   1]
```

### The ones matrix

> Create the $r \times c$ matrix over the unital ring `R` whose entries are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create the $r \times c$ matrix over the ring `R` whose entries are
```
All rings in OSCAR are unital (except perhaps the zero ring?)

all equal to the multiplicative identity of `R`.

```@docs
ones_matrix(::Ring, ::Int, ::Int)
```

**Examples**

```jldoctest
julia> I = ones_matrix(ZZ, 3, 2)
[1   1]
[1   1]
[1   1]
```

### Scalar matrices

> Create the $n \times n$ matrix over the ring `R`, whose entries are all

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create the $n \times n$ diagonal matrix over the ring `R`, whose diagonal entries are all
```

> identical to a given scalar `a` in `R`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
equal to the image of `a` in `R`.
```

```@docs
scalar_matrix(R::Ring, n::Int, a::RingElement)
```

**Examples**

```jldoctest
julia> scalar_matrix(QQ, 3, 1//2)
[1//2      0      0]
[   0   1//2      0]

> [   0      0   1//2]

Author: ```suggestion
julia> scalar_matrix(QQ, 3, 1//2)
[1//2   0//1   0//1]
[0//1   1//2   0//1]
[0//1   0//1   1//2]
```

```

### Diagonal matrices

Create a matrix over the ring `R` whose entries are all zero except for

> the diagonal entries. Two constructors are provided. One creates a rectangular

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the diagonal entries. Two constructors are provided. One function creates a rectangular
```

diagonal matrix whose diagonal entries are all equal to a given scalar. The

> other constructs a diagonal matrix whose diagonal entries are taken from a given

Reviewer: ```suggestion
other constructs a square diagonal matrix whose diagonal entries are taken from a given
```

vector.

```@docs
diagonal_matrix(::RingElement, ::Int, ::Int)
diagonal_matrix(::NCRing, ::AbstractVector{<:NCRingElement})
```

**Examples**

```jldoctest

> julia> diagonal_matrix(1, 3, 4)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
julia> diagonal_matrix(ZZ(1), 3, 4)
```

[1   0   0   0]
[0   1   0   0]
[0   0   1   0]

julia> diagonal_matrix(ZZ, [1,2,3])
[1   0   0]
[0   2   0]
[0   0   3]
```

## Block diagonal matrix constructors

> Create block diagonal matrices from a vector of existing matrices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a block diagonal matrix from a vector of existing matrices.
```

If Julia matrices are provided, one also has to supply the base ring.

Note that if the input matrices are not square, the output matrix may
not be square.

```@docs
block_diagonal_matrix(::Vector{<:MatElem{T}}) where T <: RingElement
block_diagonal_matrix(::Ring, ::Vector{<:Matrix{T}}) where T <: RingElement
```

**Examples**

```jldoctest
julia> block_diagonal_matrix(ZZ, [[1 2; 3 4], [4 5 6; 7 8 9]])
[1   2   0   0   0]
[3   4   0   0   0]
[0   0   4   5   6]
[0   0   7   8   9]

julia> M = matrix(ZZ, [1 2; 3 4])
[1   2]
[3   4]

julia> N = matrix(ZZ, [4 5 6; 7 8 9])
[4   5   6]
[7   8   9]

julia> block_diagonal_matrix([M, N])
[1   2   0   0   0]
[3   4   0   0   0]
[0   0   4   5   6]
[0   0   7   8   9]
```

## Triangular matrices

> Create (strictly) trianngular matrices over the ring `R`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create (strictly) triangular matrices over the ring `R`.
```

Why does this not require the ring as an argument?

```@docs
lower_triangular_matrix(L::AbstractVector{T}) where {T <: RingElement}
upper_triangular_matrix(L::AbstractVector{T}) where {T <: RingElement}
strictly_lower_triangular_matrix(L::AbstractVector{T}) where {T <: RingElement}
strictly_upper_triangular_matrix(L::AbstractVector{T}) where {T <: RingElement}
```

**Examples**

```jldoctest
julia> lower_triangular_matrix([1, 2, 3])
[1   0]
[2   3]

julia> strictly_lower_triangular_matrix([5])
[0   0]
[5   0]

julia> upper_triangular_matrix([3, 2, 1])
[3   2]
[0   1]

julia> strictly_upper_triangular_matrix([-2])
[0   -2]

> [0   0]

Author: ```suggestion
[0   -2]
[0    0]
```

Author: To make the doctest pass.
